TypeScript support in core (#4662)
plone/volto: docs/source/contributing/typescript.md

# TypeScript

> TypeScript support (5.2.2) has been added to Volto core.

Reviewer: I don't think we want to specify a version of third party software that will need to be updated with each release. I am lazy. 😉 

````suggestion
```{versionadded} 17.0.0-alpha.22
```
TypeScript support has been added to Volto core.
````

ESlint has been configured in order to accept code base written both in JavaScript and in TypeScript.

> The usage of TypeScript in projects and add-ons was possible already since Volto 14 and it's added as default in the project generator since Volto 17.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript in projects and add-ons has been supported since Volto 14.
It is now supported in the project generator by default.
```

## TypeScript in core

> The internal policy will be as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The internal policy for TypeScript support in Volto core will be as follows.
```

> - No existing code will be migrated at this point (eg. Volto 17.0.0 won't have any TypeScript present)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   No existing code has been migrated.
    Volto 17.0.0 has no TypeScript code present.
    Only *support* for TypeScript has been added.
```

> - Code in core can be written in both JavaScript and TypeScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Code in core can be written in either JavaScript or TypeScript, or both.
```

> - In any case you are forced to migrate existing code to TypeScript

Reviewer 2: I am not sure I understand this bullet point here

> - In any case you are forced to migrate existing code to TypeScript

Reviewer: I think you meant *not*, yes?

```suggestion
-   You are not forced to migrate existing code to TypeScript.
```

> - It's up to the developer to choose which one to use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It's your choice which one to use.
```

> - In all cases use common sense and be aware of code that could potentially have to be backported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   If you need to backport code to a version of Volto before 17.0.0, you must make the code compatible without TypeScript.
```

> - If the developer chooses TypeScript and the feature has to be backported, it's up to the developer to backport it to non-TypeScript version in legacy (eg. LTS) versions

Reviewer: Redundant to previous statement.

```suggestion
```

## TypeScript learning resources

> [TypeScript Official Handbook](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [TypeScript Official Handbook](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro.html)
```

> [TotalTypeScript React with TypeScript Free course](https://www.totaltypescript.com/tutorials/react-with-typescript)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [TotalTypeScript React with TypeScript Free course](https://www.totaltypescript.com/tutorials/react-with-typescript)
```

> [TotalTypeScript Beginner's TypeScript Free course](https://www.totaltypescript.com/tutorials/beginners-typescript)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [TotalTypeScript Beginner's TypeScript Free course](https://www.totaltypescript.com/tutorials/beginners-typescript)
```

## TypeScript in projects and add-ons

> It is possible to enable TypeScript support when developing you project with Volto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable TypeScript support when developing your project in Volto.
```

> If you are using the Volto generator, this is the default, and you can already start using TypeScript in it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use the Volto generator, TypeScript is enabled by default, and you can already start using TypeScript in it.
```

### Enable it in your Volto 17 project

> If you are already using Volto 17 in your projects, using a boilerplate generated before Volto 17.0.0-alpha.27 and the generator 7.0.0-alpha.7 you can follow the following instructions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already use Volto 17 in your projects, using a boilerplate generated before Volto 17.0.0-alpha.27 and the generator 7.0.0-alpha.7, you can enable TypeScript support as follows:
```

> Make the following changes in your {file}`package.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit your {file}`package.json`:
```

```diff
-    "lint": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 'src/**/*.{js,jsx}'",
-    "lint:fix": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 --fix 'src/**/*.{js,jsx}'",
-    "lint:ci": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 -f checkstyle 'src/**/*.{js,jsx}' > eslint.xml",
+    "lint": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 'src/**/*.{js,jsx,ts,tsx,json}'",
+    "lint:fix": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --fix 'src/**/*.{js,jsx,ts,tsx,json}'",
+    "lint:ci": "./node_modules/eslint/bin/eslint.js --max-warnings=0 -f checkstyle 'src/**/*.{js,jsx,ts,tsx,json}' > eslint.xml",
```

```diff
"devDependencies": {
+     "@plone/scripts": ^3.0.0,
+     "@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin": "6.7.0",
+     "@typescript-eslint/parser": "6.7.0",
+     "stylelint-prettier": "1.1.2",
+     "ts-jest": "^26.4.2",
+     "ts-loader": "9.4.4",
+     "typescript": "5.2.2"
}
```

```{note}

> Could be that after this, you experience hoisting problems and some packages can't be found on start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After making this change, you might experience hoisting problems and some packages can't be found on start.
```

In that case, make sure you reset your `yarn.lock` by deleting it and start with a clean environment.
```

> In case that you want to use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a `tsconfig.json` file in it, and remove the existing `jsconfig.json`. You can use the one provided by de generator as template, or use your own:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case that you want to use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a `tsconfig.json` file in it, and remove the existing `jsconfig.json`. You can use the one provided by the generator as template, or use your own:
```

> In case that you want to use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a `tsconfig.json` file in it, and remove the existing `jsconfig.json`. You can use the one provided by de generator as template, or use your own:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use TypeScript in your projects, you'll need to introduce a TypeScript configuration file {file}`tsconfig.json`, and remove the existing file {file}`jsconfig.json`.
You can use the one provided by the generator as a template, or use your own:
```

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ESNext",
    "lib": ["DOM", "DOM.Iterable", "ESNext"],
    "module": "commonjs",
    "allowJs": true,
    "skipLibCheck": true,
    "esModuleInterop": true,
    "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true,

>     "strict": false,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "strict": true,
```

    "forceConsistentCasingInFileNames": true,
    "moduleResolution": "Node",
    "resolveJsonModule": true,
    "isolatedModules": true,
    "noEmit": true,
    "jsx": "react-jsx",
    "paths": {},
    "baseUrl": "src"
  },
  "include": ["src"],
  "exclude": [
    "node_modules",
    "build",
    "public",
    "coverage",
    "src/**/*.test.{js,jsx,ts,tsx}",
    "src/**/*.spec.{js,jsx,ts,tsx}",
    "src/**/*.stories.{js,jsx,ts,tsx}"
  ]
}
```

> If you are using `mrs-developer` in your project, update the command in `Makefile`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use `mrs-developer` in your project, update the command in {file}`Makefile`:
```

```diff
--- a/Makefile
+++ b/Makefile

> @@ -59,7 +59,8 @@ preinstall: ## Preinstall task, checks if missdev (mrs-developer) is present and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@@ -59,7 +59,8 @@ preinstall: ## Preinstall task, checks if missdev (mrs-developer) is present and runs it
```

 .PHONY: develop
 develop: ## Runs missdev in the local project (mrs.developer.json should be present)
-       npx -p mrs-developer missdev --config=jsconfig.json --output=addons --fetch-https
+       if [ -f $$(pwd)/jsconfig.json ]; then npx -p mrs-developer missdev --config=jsconfig.json --output=addons --fetch-https; fi
+       if [ ! -f $$(pwd)/jsconfig.json ]; then npx -p mrs-developer missdev --output=addons --fetch-https; fi
```

````{note}

> Do not forget to run `mrs-developer` after doing it, so the configuration gets in the right place (`tsconfig.json`) now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After editing your {file}`Makefile`, run `mrs-developer` with the following command, so the configuration gets in the right place ({file}`tsconfig.json`).
```

> Run

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```shell
make develop
```
````

### Enable it in a project not using Volto 17 yet

> If you have an existing project using a Volto version previous to Volto 17 (and above 14), and you want to use TypeScript on it, you need to install these additional dependencies in your project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use TypeScript for an existing project in Volto versions 14.x-16.x, you need to install these additional dependencies in your project:
```
